Design: Iceberg support (#5825)
treeverse/lakeFS: design/open/iceberg-branching.md

# Iceberg support: branching & isolation

## Problem Description

Iceberg stores metadata files that represent a snapshot of a given Iceberg table.
Those metadata files save the locataion of the data hard-coded.
This is problematic with lakeFS, since we cannot work on the same files with different branches.

For example when working on branch `main`, the metadata files will be written with the property `"location" : "s3a://example-repo/main/db/table1"`.
This means the data is located in `"s3a://example-repo/main/db/table1"`.
However, when branching out from main to `feature-branch`, the metadata files still point to the main branch.
With this we lose the capability of isolation.

## Goals

> Enable isolation with iceberg table. Create branch from existing one, and writing the data and metadata to the relevant branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable working in isolation with an Iceberg table. Create a branch in lakeFS, and operate on the table on the branch.
```

At first stage: support iceberg without being catalog agnostic - meaning work with only lakeFS catalog and not be compatible with other catalogs.
At second stage: being catalog agnostic. Users will be able to configure both lakeFS catalog and other catalog together.

> - The catalogs that will be supported are Glue, Snoflake and Tabular.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The catalogs that will be supported are Glue, Snowflake and Tabular.
```

Reviewer: @itaiad200, this is a product decision but it is open to discussion as subject to change as we proceed. So maybe:
```suggestion
- We will start by supporting a limited set of catalogs, for example Glue, Snowflake and Tabular.
```

> - The catalogs that will be supported are Glue, Snoflake and Tabular.

Reviewer 2: Why these? Also - why not start with 1?

Author: Yoni is investigation this option, we decided to start with the current implementation in order to fail fast, and we'll consider this at next phase.

## Non Goals

- Support merge operation.

> - Enable lakeFS operations using a dedicated SQL syntax.

Reviewer 3: Will these be possible somehow?  Don't care about a detailed design, but _do_ prefer solutions that are steps along the way to having these -- particularly merges!

Author: Yes, enabling SQL syntax isn't related to own solution, and we do believe that our solution will fit to merge operation in the future.

> ## Proposed Design
> 
> Implement lakeFS catalog:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Proposed Design: Dedicated lakeFS catalog
```

The catalog stores current metadata pointer for Iceberg tables.
With lakeFS, this pointer needs to be versioned as well.
In order to prevent from adding versioning capabilities to existing catalogs, we'll extend a catalog that can utilize lakeFS to keep the pointer.

> Therefor, we'll extend hadoop catalog to work with lakeFS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, we'll extend the Hadoop catalog to work with lakeFS
```

> - Every operation of the catalog happens with the scope of a reference in lakeFS.

Reviewer 3: Can you explain how we know the scope?  Is this by looking at the ref in the path?

- Write location on metadata files to be relative: the repo and brach will not be written.
- The catalog will know to use the metadata files from the relevant references
  

> Implement lakeFSIO:

Reviewer 3: Suggestion:
```suggestion
Implement LakeFSFileIO:
```

> FileIO is the primary interface between the core Iceberg library and underlying storage. In practice, it is just two operations: open for read and open for write.

Reviewer 3: Can you add a link to FileIO, please?

> We'll Extend hadoop fileIO to work with lakeFS, and to be compatible with lakeFS catalog. 

Reviewer 2: How will the repo and branch be passed to the lakeFSIO?

> 

Reviewer 3: I know very little about Iceberg and FileIOs, only what I remember from about a year ago, so I am probably asking silly questions.  But we might want to answer (some of) them in this design doc.

1. What is the behaviour of the lakeFSIO?  Does it affect manifests, or something more?  Does it change the _path_ to the manifests?

   To pick an example at random of something I don't understand: The [manifests spec](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#manifests) says `data_file.file_path` is the "full URI for the file with FS scheme".  Is lakeFSIO responsible for returning it in this manner?  If so, what gets stored in the manifest object itself and how does lakeFSIO process it?  Does lakeFSIO understand Avro?
1. How do we support concurrency?  This is the point of using Iceberg, "_safely... at the same time_" [appears](https://iceberg.apache.org/) in the 2-line description at the top.  The spec goes into [atomic rename](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#file-system-tables).  Do we need to do that?  lakeFS _does_ support atomic rename by branching out, copying and deleting, and merging back.  Does lakeFSIO need to do that, or will we be fine without it?

   Or, Iceberg seems to want to do this to implement some [isolation between reads and writes](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#optimistic-concurrency).  Is the plan to use lakeFS directly for this concurrency?
1. I had a quick look and it seems that Iceberg may allow importing external files: for instance this might be an [`add_files` operation](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/issues/2068).  How does this work?  What is the intended behaviour?  If it is not supported, can we block it if we only implement a FileIO?

Author: 1. the fileIO (with sync to the catalog) is responsible to write and read the files, it will write the relative locations in the metadata files, and will have the scope of lakeFS repo and ref. Beside that it should work the same.

2. At first stage lakeFS won't support atomicity. We believe it's Ok since we are always at scope of a brach.
We'll require a single-writer per branch. It's a limitation but we think it's reasonable for now.

3. I think that for now it's out of scope. I added it to the open questions to keep that in mind.

Reviewer 3: Please explain (1) in the design.  I am still not sure how we propose to translate to relative paths:
* Does Iceberg _already_ use relative paths
* Or, does our FileIO perform this translation...
  - when writing?
  - when reading?

About (2) thanks for adding text!  In order of preference, we need to:
* Enforce single-writer (e.g., all writers but the first fail)
* Report multiple writers (e.g., all writers or all writers but the first report a multiple writers error, and the state is indeterminate)
* "Just" document it.
But we need to do at least the last in the list.

About (3), again: can we block it, or if not can we report it, or do we "just" document it?

## Alternatives Considered

### Implementation of lakeFS FileIO alone

> In order to enable the user to choose his preferred catalog, we considered implementing only lakeFS FileIO.

Reviewer 3: Our [documentation style guide requests](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/blob/281f1f9c112e868c314af4426ce376bd6beb1042/docs/README.md?plain=1#L13) gender-neutral phrasing:
```suggestion
In order to enable the user to choose their preferred catalog, we considered implementing only lakeFS FileIO.
```

> This attemp failed since, as mentioned above, it will require the catalog to be able to version metadata pointers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, this will require the catalog to be able to version metadata pointers.
```

This will be very hard and won't enable us to fail fast.

## Usage

Iceberg operations:

> Users will need to configure lakeFS catalog, with the relevant hadoop configuration.

Reviewer 2: Can you share how?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user will need to set the catalog implementation to be the lakeFS catalog. For example, if working in Spark:
`spark.sql.catalog.lakefs.catalog-impl=io.lakefs.iceberg.LakeFSCatalog`

The user will also need to configure a Hadoop FileSystem that can interact with objects on lakeFS, like the S3AFileSystem or LakeFSFileSystem.
```

Every operation on iceberg table (writing, reading, compaction, etc.) will be performed on the table in lakeFS.

> Meaning, the user will need to specify the full path of the table, containing the repo and reference in lakeFS.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if this says we _add_ some limitation, or states that our FileIO will anyway see a full path and therefore everything will just work.  Obviously I prefer the second :-)

Author: It is the second one. :) 
I'll add it

For example:

> `SELECT * FROM example-repo.main.table1;`

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the example!

1. Does Iceberg indeed support all allowed characters in repo names?  For instance, PostgreSQL would require the tablename identifier to be doublequoted:
   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM "example-repo.main.table1";
   ```
   It is usually very precise about SQL rules.  If Iceberg does _not_ allow quoting names, this introduces a limitation to users about repository and branch names.
1. Where and how do I define `table1`?  (Is it in lakeFS, per-ref?)
1. This will work for any commit ref, right?  That would make me _very_ happy.

Author: 1. I tried to run a query with quotes but it didn't work. I believe we'll be able to solve it when we'll face the issue.
2. With iceberg 
3. yes 
(added 2 and 3 to the design)

lakeFS:
lakeFS operations will stay as is.
Interacting with lakeFS will be through lakeFS clients, not through Iceberg.
Branch, diff and commit operations should work out of the box (since the locations in the metadata files are relative).
Diff will not show changes done to the table (like in delta diff).

## Packaging

We will publish this catalog to Maven central.
To start using Iceberg with lakeFS, the user will need to add the lakeFS catalog as a dependency.

## Open Questions

> - Can this catalog become part of the Iceberg source code?

Author: Absolutely. I'm checking this :)

- Migration: how to use move my existing tables to lakeFS?
- Iceberg diff: how to view table changes in lakeFS.

> - Merge: how to allow merging between branches?

Reviewer 2: Or meanwhile block merges that are going to make a table inconsistent.

Reviewer 3: I think probably conflicting merges will be blocked by our regular rules of merges :-/

With lakeFS, this pointer needs to be versioned as well.
In order to prevent from adding versioning capabilities to existing catalogs, we'll extend a catalog that can utilize lakeFS to keep the pointer.
Therefore, we'll extend the Hadoop catalog to work with lakeFS
- Every operation of the catalog happens with the scope of a reference in lakeFS. This will be extracted from the table path.
- Write location on metadata files to be relative: the repo and brach will not be written.
- The catalog will know to use the metadata files from the relevant references
  
Implement LakeFSFileIO:
[FileIO](https://iceberg.apache.org/javadoc/master/org/apache/iceberg/io/FileIO.html) is the primary interface between the core Iceberg library and underlying storage (read more [here](https://tabular.io/blog/iceberg-fileio/#:~:text=FileIO%20is%20the%20primary%20interface,how%20straightforward%20the%20interface%20is.)). In practice, it is just two operations: open for read and open for write.
We'll Extend hadoop fileIO to work with lakeFS, and to be compatible with lakeFS catalog.
As with the catalog, the reference in lakeFS will be extracted from the table path.

> With this design the catalog won't support atomicity. We believe it's Ok at first stage since we are always at scope of a branch.
> For that, we'll require a single-writer per branch.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design will require users to only have a single writer per branch. This because the Hadoop catalog uses a rename operation which is not atomic in lakeFS. We think it's a reasonable limitation to start with. We may be able to overcome this limitation in the future, using the `IfNoneMatch` flag in the lakeFS API.
```

> We think it's a reasonable limitation to start with. We may be able to overcome this limitation in the future, using the `IfNoneMatch` flag in the lakeFS API.

Reviewer 3: AFAIK that flag no longer works ever since KV.  The only lakeFS synchronization primitive I know of is merging.  @N-o-Z / @nopcoder amirite?

## Alternatives Considered

### Implementation of lakeFS FileIO alone
In order to enable the users to choose their preferred catalog, we considered implementing only lakeFS FileIO.
As mentioned above, this will require the catalog to be able to version metadata pointers.
This will be very hard and won't enable us to fail fast.

## Usage

Iceberg operations:

The user will need to set the catalog implementation to be the lakeFS catalog. For example, if working in Spark:
`spark.sql.catalog.lakefs.catalog-impl=io.lakefs.iceberg.LakeFSCatalog`
The user will also need to configure a Hadoop FileSystem that can interact with objects on lakeFS, like the S3AFileSystem or LakeFSFileSystem.

> Every operation on iceberg table (writing, reading, compaction, etc.) will be performed on the table in lakeFS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every operation on the Iceberg table (writing, reading, compaction, etc.) will be performed on the table in lakeFS.
```
